AWS InstantOn (#2898)
OpenLiberty/blogs: posts/2023-02-20-aws-instant-on.adoc

---
layout: post
title: "Liberty InstantOn on Amazon EKS"
# Do NOT change the categories section
categories: blog
author_picture: https://avatars3.githubusercontent.com/jgawor
author_github: https://github.com/jgawor
seo-title: Liberty InstantOn on Amazon EKS - OpenLiberty.io

> seo-description: Taking advantage of Liberty InstantOn on Amazon EKS

Reviewer: ```suggestion
seo-description: Liberty InstantOn dramatically speeds up the startup time of Liberty applications. In this post, we will deploy a simple Liberty application to Amazon Elastic Kubernetes Service (Amazon EKS) and use InstantOn to quickly spin up application containers.
```

> blog_description: Taking advantage of Liberty InstantOn on Amazon EKS

Reviewer: ```suggestion
blog_description: Liberty InstantOn dramatically speeds up the startup time of Liberty applications. In this post, we will deploy a simple Liberty application to Amazon Elastic Kubernetes Service (Amazon EKS) and use InstantOn to quickly spin up application containers.
```

---
= Liberty InstantOn on Amazon EKS
Jarek Gawor <https://github.com/jgawor>

//Blank line here is necessary before starting the body of the post.

> The link:https://openliberty.io/blog/2023/02/10/instant-on-beta-update.html[Liberty InstantOn] feature dramatically speeds up the start up time of Liberty applications. In this blog post, we will deploy a simple Liberty application to Amazon Elastic Kubernetes Service (Amazon EKS) and take advantage of the InstantOn functionality to quickly spin up application containers. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
link:https://openliberty.io/blog/2023/02/10/instant-on-beta-update.html[Liberty InstantOn] dramatically speeds up the startup time of Liberty applications. In this post, we will deploy a simple Liberty application to Amazon Elastic Kubernetes Service (Amazon EKS) and use InstantOn to quickly spin up application containers. 
```

First, we will build an InstantOn container image and push it to link:https://aws.amazon.com/ecr/[Amazon Elastic Container Registry (Amazon ECR)]. Next, we will create a new Amazon EKS cluster, deploy the Liberty application to the cluster, and scale the application up.

> To complete the steps outlined in this post, you will need the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To complete the steps outlined in this post, you need the following resources:
```

* link:https://maven.apache.org/[Maven] to build the Liberty application
* link:https://podman.io/[Podman] to build the InstantOn image
* An link:https://aws.amazon.com/[Amazon AWS] Account
* The link:https://aws.amazon.com/cli/[AWS CLI] to create and manage AWS services
* The link:https://eksctl.io/[Amazon EKS CLI] to create and manage EKS clusters
* The link:https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/#kubectl[kubectl] command-line tool to interact with a Kubernetes cluster

> == Build InstantOn image

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Build the InstantOn image
```

> First, clone the repository of the sample Liberty application. We are checking out the `instanton` branch as it contains the InstantOn modifications. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, clone the repository of the sample Liberty application. We are checking out the `instanton` branch, which contains the InstantOn modifications. 
```

```
git clone -b instanton https://github.com/OpenLiberty/sample-getting-started.git
cd sample-getting-started
```

Next, build the application code using Maven:
```
mvn install
```

> Once the code is compiled, we can build the InstantOn container image. The process actually involves creating two container images. The first container image is a base image that just contains the application. The second container image extends the first image and adds the checkpoint data needed for a quick start up.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the code is compiled, we can build the InstantOn container image. This process creates two container images: 
* The base image, which contains only the application
* The InstantOn image, which extends the base image and adds the checkpoint data needed for a quick startup.  
```

> NOTE: Elevated Linux permissions are required to build the InstantOn container image. However, for simplicity, the next few commands will need to run as the `root` user using the `sudo` command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NOTE: Elevated Linux permissions are required to build the InstantOn container image. However, to simplify the example, the next few commands are run as the `root` user using the `sudo` command.
```

To build the base image run:
```
sudo ./build-og.sh
```
The script runs a simple `podman build` command and creates the `dev.local/getting-started` container image.

To build the InstantOn image run:
```
sudo ./build-instanton.sh
```
The scripts runs a sequence of `podman` commands that create the checkpoint data and save that data in a new `dev.local/getting-started-instanton` container image.

> == Push image to ECR

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Push the image to ECR
```

> At this point, the InstantOn image on exists on a local machine. We will need to push it to some container registry to make it available to the EKS cluster. One option is to make the image available in a public registry such as link:https://hub.docker.com/[DockerHub] or link:https://quay.io[Quay]. Another option is to use Amazon ECR. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At this point, the InstantOn image on exists on a local machine. We need to push it to a container registry to make it available to the EKS cluster. One option is to make the image available in a public registry, such as link:https://hub.docker.com/[DockerHub] or link:https://quay.io[Quay]. Another option is to use Amazon ECR. 
```

> In this post, we will use Amazon ECR for a couple of reasons. First, a default private Amazon ECR is provided with each AWS account. That means, we do not have to set up and configure a separate registry elsewhere. Second, Amazon ECR can seamlessly integrate with EKS and other similar AWS services such as link:https://aws.amazon.com/ecs/[Amazon ECS)]. That means, we do not have to configure any image pull secrets in our EKS cluster to pull down images from the private container registry.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this post, we will use Amazon ECR for a couple of reasons. First, a default private Amazon ECR is provided with each AWS account, so we don't have to set up and configure a separate registry elsewhere. Second, Amazon ECR can seamlessly integrate with EKS and other similar AWS services such as link:https://aws.amazon.com/ecs/[Amazon ECS)]. Therefore, we do not have to configure any image pull secrets in our EKS cluster to pull down images from the private container registry.
```

> To use the private Amazon ECR registry, first you will need create a repository for the InstantOn image:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use the private Amazon ECR registry, first create a repository for the InstantOn image:
```

```
aws ecr create-repository --repository-name getting-started-instanton
```

> In the output of this command, note the `repositoryUri` value. It should match the `<aws_account_id>.dkr.ecr.<region>.amazonaws.com/getting-started-instanton` pattern. For example: `1234567890.dkr.ecr.us-east-1.amazonaws.com/getting-started-instanton`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the output of this command, note the `repositoryUri` value. It should match the `<aws_account_id>.dkr.ecr.<region>.amazonaws.com/getting-started-instanton` pattern. For example: `1234567890.dkr.ecr.us-east-1.amazonaws.com/getting-started-instanton`.  You will need this value when you create the `deployment.yaml` file to deploy the InstantOn application.
```

> Next, you will need to authenticate to the registry in order to push or pull images using Podman. To do that, use the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, authenticate to the registry using the following command so you can push or pull images using Podman:
```

```
aws ecr get-login-password | sudo podman login --username AWS --password-stdin <aws_account_id>.dkr.ecr.<region>.amazonaws.com
```

> Once authenticated, you can tag and push the InstantOn image to the private ECR registry:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After you are authenticated, you can tag and push the InstantOn image to the private ECR registry:
```

```
sudo podman tag dev.local/getting-started-instanton <aws_account_id>.dkr.ecr.<region>.amazonaws.com/getting-started-instanton
sudo podman push <aws_account_id>.dkr.ecr.<region>.amazonaws.com/getting-started-instanton
```

> === Provision EKS cluster

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Provision the EKS cluster
```

  region: us-east-1
  version: "1.24"

managedNodeGroups:
  - name: ng-instanton
    instanceType: t3.micro
    desiredCapacity: 3
    amiFamily: Bottlerocket
    iam:
       attachPolicyARNs:
          - arn:aws:iam::aws:policy/AmazonEKSWorkerNodePolicy
          - arn:aws:iam::aws:policy/AmazonEKS_CNI_Policy
          - arn:aws:iam::aws:policy/AmazonEC2ContainerRegistryReadOnly
          - arn:aws:iam::aws:policy/AmazonSSMManagedInstanceCore
----

The initial `cluster.yaml` file requests a Kuberentes v1.24 cluster to be provisioned with three link:https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/managed-node-groups.html[managed EC2 nodes] that are running the link:https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/eks-optimized-ami-bottlerocket.html[Bottlerocket operating system]. The cluster is just big enough to handle the sample application. If you are planning to deploy other applications to the cluster, adjust the `instanceType` and/or the `desiredCapacity` parameters. Also, make sure that the `region` parameter matches your region. See the link:https://eksctl.io/usage/schema/[config file schema] for additional settings that can be configured when provisioning a cluster.

> NOTE: The cluster nodes are created with the EKS optimized Bottlerocket Amazon Machine Image (AMI) instead of the default Amazon Linux AMI. The Bottlerocket AMI as well as the Ubuntu 20 AMI are using a Linux kernel version that supports InstantOn. As of this writing, the Amazon Linux AMI is running a slightly older kernel version that does not fully support InstantOn.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NOTE: The cluster nodes are created with the EKS optimized Bottlerocket Amazon Machine Image (AMI) instead of the default Amazon Linux AMI. The Bottlerocket AMI and the Ubuntu 20 AMI use a Linux kernel version that supports InstantOn. As of this writing, the Amazon Linux AMI is running a slightly older kernel version that does not fully support InstantOn.
```

After making updates to the `cluster.yaml`, run the following command to provision the EKS cluster:
```
eksctl create cluster -f cluster.yaml
```

> After 15 or so minutes the cluster should be provisioned and ready to use. Double check by running the following command to see the cluster nodes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After about 15 minutes, the cluster should be provisioned and ready to use. Double check by running the following command to see the cluster nodes:
```

```
kubectl get node -o wide
```

> You should see a similar output:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Look for output similar to the following example:
```

```
NAME                             STATUS   ROLES    AGE     VERSION               INTERNAL-IP      EXTERNAL-IP      OS-IMAGE                                KERNEL-VERSION   CONTAINER-RUNTIME
ip-xxx-xxx-xx-xxx.ec2.internal   Ready    <none>   2m44s   v1.24.6-eks-4360b32   xxx.xxx.xx.xxx   xx.xxx.xxx.xxx   Bottlerocket OS 1.11.1 (aws-k8s-1.24)   5.15.59          containerd://1.6.8+bottlerocket
ip-xxx-xxx-xx-xxx.ec2.internal   Ready    <none>   2m42s   v1.24.6-eks-4360b32   xxx.xxx.xx.xxx   xx.xx.xx.xx      Bottlerocket OS 1.11.1 (aws-k8s-1.24)   5.15.59          containerd://1.6.8+bottlerocket
```

> === Deploy InstantOn application

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Deploy the InstantOn application
```

> Once the cluster is up and running, we can deploy the Liberty InstantOn application. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After the cluster is up and running, we can deploy the Liberty InstantOn application. 
```

> First, create a `deployment.yaml` file with the following contents:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, create a `deployment.yaml` file with the following contents. Update the `image` value to match the `repositoryUri` from the `create-repository` command output.
```

.deployment.yaml
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: open-liberty-instanton
spec:
  replicas: 1
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app.kubernetes.io/name: open-liberty-instanton
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app.kubernetes.io/name: open-liberty-instanton
    spec:
      containers:
      - image: <aws_account_id>.dkr.ecr.<region>.amazonaws.com/getting-started-instanton
        imagePullPolicy: IfNotPresent
        name: app
        ports:
        - containerPort: 9080
          name: 9080-tcp
          protocol: TCP
        resources:
          limits:
            cpu: 1
            memory: 512Mi
          requests:
            cpu: 500m
            memory: 256Mi
        securityContext:
          runAsNonRoot: true
          privileged: false
          capabilities:
            add:
            - CHECKPOINT_RESTORE
            - SETPCAP
            drop:
            - ALL
----

> Make sure to update the `image` value to match the `repositoryUri` from the `create-repository` step. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Next, deploy the application by running the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, deploy the application by running the following command:
```

```
kubectl apply -f deployment.yaml
```

> Check the logs to see if the application started up successfully. Keep in mind that it might take a few extra seconds for the pod to start for very first time as the cluster nodes need pull down the container image from ECR:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Check the logs to see if the application started up successfully. Keep in mind that it might take a few extra seconds for the pod to start for very first time as the cluster nodes must pull down the container image from ECR:
```

```
kubectl logs -l app.kubernetes.io/name=open-liberty-instanton --tail=-1
```

> You should see the following if the application started successfully with InstantOn:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Look for the following output to confirm that the application started successfully with InstantOn:
```

```
[AUDIT   ] CWWKZ0001I: Application io.openliberty.sample.getting.started started in 0.331 seconds.
[AUDIT   ] CWWKC0452I: The Liberty server process resumed operation from a checkpoint in 0.464 seconds.
[AUDIT   ] CWWKF0012I: The server installed the following features: [cdi-2.0, checkpoint-1.0, distributedMap-1.0, jaxrs-2.1, jaxrsClient-2.1, jndi-1.0, json-1.0, jsonp-1.1, monitor-1.0, mpConfig-2.0, mpHealth-3.1, mpMetrics-3.0, servlet-4.0, ssl-1.0].
[AUDIT   ] CWWKF0011I: The defaultServer server is ready to run a smarter planet. The defaultServer server started in 0.510 seconds.
[AUDIT   ] CWWKS4104A: LTPA keys created in 0.919 seconds. LTPA key file: /opt/ol/wlp/output/defaultServer/resources/security/ltpa.keys
[AUDIT   ] CWPKI0803A: SSL certificate created in 3.290 seconds. SSL key file: /opt/ol/wlp/output/defaultServer/resources/security/key.p12
```

Now, you can scale the application up to see how quickly the new pod instances are coming up!
```
kubectl scale deployment/open-liberty-instanton --replicas=3
```

In a follow on blog post, we will combine InstantOn with link:https://knative.dev/docs/serving/[Knative] and explore the scale-to-zero scenario.

=== Clean up

> If you no longer need the EKS cluster, make sure to delete the cluster by running the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you no longer need the EKS cluster, make sure to delete it by running the following command:
```

---
layout: post
title: "Liberty InstantOn on Amazon EKS"
# Do NOT change the categories section
categories: blog
author_picture: https://avatars3.githubusercontent.com/jgawor
author_github: https://github.com/jgawor
seo-title: Liberty InstantOn on Amazon EKS - OpenLiberty.io
seo-description: Liberty InstantOn dramatically speeds up the startup time of Liberty applications. In this post, we will deploy a simple Liberty application to Amazon Elastic Kubernetes Service (Amazon EKS) and use InstantOn to quickly spin up application containers.
blog_description: Liberty InstantOn dramatically speeds up the startup time of Liberty applications. In this post, we will deploy a simple Liberty application to Amazon Elastic Kubernetes Service (Amazon EKS) and use InstantOn to quickly spin up application containers.
---
= Liberty InstantOn on Amazon EKS
Jarek Gawor <https://github.com/jgawor>

//Blank line here is necessary before starting the body of the post.

> link:https://openliberty.io/blog/2023/02/10/instant-on-beta-update.html[Liberty InstantOn] dramatically speeds up the startup time of Liberty applications. In this post, we will deploy a simple Liberty application to Amazon Elastic Kubernetes Service (Amazon EKS) and use InstantOn to quickly spin up application containers. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
link:https://openliberty.io/blog/2023/02/10/instant-on-beta-update.html[Liberty InstantOn] dramatically improves the startup time of Liberty applications. In this post, we will deploy a simple Liberty application to Amazon Elastic Kubernetes Service (Amazon EKS) and use InstantOn to quickly spin up application containers. 
```

To complete the steps outlined in this post, you need the following resources:

* link:https://maven.apache.org/[Maven] to build the Liberty application
* link:https://podman.io/[Podman] to build the InstantOn image
* An link:https://aws.amazon.com/[Amazon AWS] Account
* The link:https://aws.amazon.com/cli/[AWS CLI] to create and manage AWS services
* The link:https://eksctl.io/[Amazon EKS CLI] (v0.120.0 or higher) to create and manage EKS clusters
* The link:https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/#kubectl[kubectl] command-line tool to interact with a Kubernetes cluster

== Build the InstantOn image

First, clone the repository of the sample Liberty application. We are checking out the `instanton` branch, which contains the InstantOn modifications. 
```
git clone -b instanton https://github.com/OpenLiberty/sample-getting-started.git
cd sample-getting-started
```

Next, build the application code using Maven:
```
mvn install
```

Once the code is compiled, we can build the InstantOn container image. This process creates two container images: 

> * The base image, which contains only the application

Reviewer: need a blank line between sentence at line 44 and list items to enable list formatting (sorry, my mistake)

Author: fixed

* The InstantOn image, which extends the base image and adds the checkpoint data needed for a quick startup.  

NOTE: Elevated Linux permissions are required to build the InstantOn container image. However, to simplify the example, the next few commands are run as the `root` user using the `sudo` command.

> To build the base image run:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To build the base image, run:
```

```
sudo ./build-og.sh
```
The script runs a simple `podman build` command and creates the `dev.local/getting-started` container image.

> To build the InstantOn image run:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To build the InstantOn image, run:
```

```
kubectl logs -l app.kubernetes.io/name=open-liberty-instanton --tail=-1
```

Look for the following output to confirm that the application started successfully with InstantOn:
```
[AUDIT   ] CWWKZ0001I: Application io.openliberty.sample.getting.started started in 0.331 seconds.
[AUDIT   ] CWWKC0452I: The Liberty server process resumed operation from a checkpoint in 0.464 seconds.
[AUDIT   ] CWWKF0012I: The server installed the following features: [cdi-2.0, checkpoint-1.0, distributedMap-1.0, jaxrs-2.1, jaxrsClient-2.1, jndi-1.0, json-1.0, jsonp-1.1, monitor-1.0, mpConfig-2.0, mpHealth-3.1, mpMetrics-3.0, servlet-4.0, ssl-1.0].
[AUDIT   ] CWWKF0011I: The defaultServer server is ready to run a smarter planet. The defaultServer server started in 0.510 seconds.
[AUDIT   ] CWWKS4104A: LTPA keys created in 0.919 seconds. LTPA key file: /opt/ol/wlp/output/defaultServer/resources/security/ltpa.keys
[AUDIT   ] CWPKI0803A: SSL certificate created in 3.290 seconds. SSL key file: /opt/ol/wlp/output/defaultServer/resources/security/key.p12
```

> Now, you can scale the application up to see how quickly the new pod instances are coming up! Results may vary but you should see up to 90% improvement in the startup time.

Reviewer: > Results may vary but you should see up to 90% improvement in the startup time.

Improvement over what? I might be reading this wrong, but is there anything to compare the startup time to here? Is it compared to starting the Liberty starter w/out InstantOn?

Author: updated.
